Tutorial: Configuring event filters on shinzo host (#224)
shinzonetwork/docs: content/guides/configuring-event-filters-on-a-shinzo-host.md

---
title: Configuring Event Filters on a Shinzo Host

> sidebar_label: Configuring Event Filters on a Shinzo Host

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This isn't strictly necessary since it's the same as the title.

> sidebar_position: 1

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

This gets overwritten by the sidebar.json file. Can delete it here.

> description: Configuring Event Filters on a Shinzo Host

Reviewer: A more descriptive description is handy. Something like this will do:

```suggestion
description: "Shinzo hosts will store absolutely everything it is given from an Indexer by default. In this guide you will learn how to configure a Host to only store USDT ERC-20 contact events."
```

---

## Overview

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Not necessary. Readers are smart enough to understand that the intro paragraph on a guide is the overview of what they're about to learn. Removing it reduces visual clutter.

> A Shinzo Host subscribes to a stream of blockchain data and writes it to a local DefraDB instance. By default it stores everything. This guide configures it to store only specific contract events using USDT ERC-20 transfers as the example and prune old data automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
A Shinzo Host subscribes to a stream of blockchain data and writes it to a local DefraDB instance. By default the Host stores everything, but they can be configured to only store specific data. As an example, this guide configures the Host client to only store USDT ERC-20 transfer events.
```

Makes the purpose of this guide a bit more specific.

## Prerequisites

> - Docker Desktop installed and running

Reviewer: Do we specifically need Docker _Desktop_, or can the reader just run `docker` from their terminal?

Author: updated to just docker, it doesn't need to be docker desktop

- Git

> - Basic familiarity with YAML

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Unnecessary. Prerequisites should be either hardware or software specific. We can expect our readers to understand how to work with config files.

## Clone the repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/shinzonetwork/shinzo-host-client.git
cd shinzo-host-client

> ```

Reviewer: Having each step as a title, like this, introduces a lot of visual clutter into the page (especially in the sidebar). It also makes it harder for readers to jump to a section they need. Instead, create clear sections that individual steps can go into.

````suggestion
## Setup

First, let's check that the prerequisites are properly installed and get the project set up properly:

1. Check that Docker and Git are installed:

    ```shell
    docker --version && git --version
    ```

    ```output
    Docker version 29.5.3, build d1c06ef
    git version 2.43.0
    ```

1. Clone the Host client repo and move into it:

    ```shell
    git clone https://github.com/shinzonetwork/shinzo-host-client.git
    cd shinzo-host-client
    ```
````

## Configure the host

Open `config/config.yaml`. The sections below are the ones you need to understand.

### Securing Your Local Database

```yaml
defradb:
  keyring_secret: "your-secret-here"
```

This key encrypts the local DefraDB instance. Use a strong secret value before running a host in production.

### Connecting to the Shinzo Network

> Views can be published to and discovered through ShinzoHub. Once you’ve created a view, connect it to ShinzoHub to make it available across the network and enable other builders to access and use it. See the documentation for more details [here](https://docs.shinzo.network/reference/components/shinzohub/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Views can be published to and discovered through ShinzoHub. Once you’ve created a view, connect it to ShinzoHub to make it available across the network and enable other builders to access and use it. [See the documentation for more details.](/reference/components/shinzohub/).
```

Two things here:

1. Linking this just a `here` is bad practice. It can cause difficulties for search engines/LLMs. It's also harder for readers to immediately see where the link is going.
2. Use relative or absolute links _without_ `https://docs.shinzo.network`. Full URL links like this don't get caught in the local-link checker. They also end up with an external link icon next to them, which is incorrect since we're linking to an internal page.

### Pruning

```yaml
pruner:
  enabled: true
  max_blocks: 2000
  interval_seconds: 30
```

The pruner deletes data for blocks older than `max_blocks`. At roughly 12 seconds per Ethereum block, 2000 blocks is about 6–7 hours of history. Increase this if you need more, keeping in mind the storage implications.

### Filtering Blockchain Events

This is what controls what gets stored. Without a filter, everything is written to disk.

```yaml
event_filter:
  enabled: true
  mode: "allowlist"

  groups:
    - name: "usdt-transfers"
      enabled: true

      contracts:
        - name: "USDT"
          address: "0xdAC17F958D2ee523a2206206994597C13D831ec7"
          types: ["log"]

      topics:
        - name: "Transfer"
          topic0: "0xddf252ad1be2c89b69c2b068fc378daa952ba7f163c4a11628f55a4df523b3ef"
```

**How it works:**

- `mode: "allowlist"` — only events matching a group are stored. Use `"blocklist"` to invert this.
- `contracts.address` — the on-chain address of the contract you want to watch.
- `contracts.types: ["log"]` — EVM event logs. This is where token transfers live.

> - `topics.topic0` — the keccak256 hash of the event signature. For `Transfer(address,address,uint256)` this is always `0xddf252ad...`. This is what distinguishes a Transfer log from any other log emitted by the same contract.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `mode: "allowlist"`: only events matching a group are stored. Use `"blocklist"` to invert this.
- `contracts.address`: the on-chain address of the contract you want to watch.
- `contracts.types: ["log"]`: EVM event logs. This is where token transfers live.
- `topics.topic0`: the keccak256 hash of the event signature. For `Transfer(address,address,uint256)` this is always `0xddf252ad...`. This is what distinguishes a Transfer log from any other log emitted by the same contract.
```

Em-dashes `—` are a clear hallmark of AI-written content. They're fine to use, be incorrectly placed in this context.

**To track a different token**, replace the contract `address` with the one you want. Contract addresses are available on Etherscan.

**To track multiple tokens**, add another group under `groups`:

```yaml
  - name: "usdc-transfers"
    enabled: true
    contracts:
      - name: "USDC"
        address: "0xA0b86991c6218b36c1d19D4a2e9Eb0cE3606eB48"
        types: ["log"]
    topics:
      - name: "Transfer"
        topic0: "0xddf252ad1be2c89b69c2b068fc378daa952ba7f163c4a11628f55a4df523b3ef"
```

The `topic0` for ERC-20 Transfer is the same across all tokens — it's derived from the function signature, not the contract.

**To filter by sender or receiver**, use `topic1` and `topic2`. Indexed event parameters are exposed as topics. For ERC-20 Transfer: `topic1` is the sender, `topic2` is the receiver. Addresses must be zero-padded to 32 bytes:

```yaml
topics:
  - name: "Transfer"
    topic0: "0xddf252ad1be2c89b69c2b068fc378daa952ba7f163c4a11628f55a4df523b3ef"
    topic1: "0x000000000000000000000000<sender-address-without-0x>"
```

> **To compute `topic0` for a custom event**, hash its canonical signature:

Reviewer: A lot of the paragraphs in this section start **with bolded text**. Is this intentional? It looks a bit odd. Maybe this is a good opportunity to create a new section with sub-sections/titles?

```javascript
// ethers.js
const { ethers } = require("ethers");
console.log(ethers.utils.id("Transfer(address,address,uint256)"));
```

> Or use an online keccak256 tool at `https://emn178.github.io/online-tools/keccak_256.html`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Or use an [online keccak256 tool](https://emn178.github.io/online-tools/keccak_256.html).
```

Why not just create a link directly to that tool?

### P2P peers

```yaml
p2p:
  enabled: true
  bootstrap_peers:
    - '/ip4/34.63.13.57/tcp/9171/p2p/12D3KooWBT2F45LH7Gy6EadTE3sm7PKofyJ3RXcCnKufdu4L5c4M'
    - '/ip4/35.208.241.78/tcp/9171/p2p/12D3KooWDYXkjdncFL3X1SaaYBpFi4XfWskbXv4y5gYdTvmGm3bo'
    - '/ip4/35.209.45.53/tcp/9171/p2p/12D3KooWNLCXZEVZoM6NwU1i7zAZDscEZHhynsF74M5hP99sptM9'
```

These are the addresses of the peers your host connects to for data. Check the [Shinzo Validators list](https://registration.shinzo.network/validators) for updated peer lists; these change when the network is updated.

> ## Running the Host

Reviewer: Again, these should be turned into individual steps in a list, rather than titles:

````suggestion
## Running the Host

1. In `docker-compose.yml`, uncomment the volumes entry so Docker uses your config file:

    ```yaml
    volumes:
      - ./config/config.yaml:/app/config.yaml:ro
    ```

1. Start the Host:

    ```shell
    docker compose up -d
    ```

1. Confirm Containers Are Healthy:

    ```shell
    docker ps
    ```
````

### Mount your Configuration

In `docker-compose.yml`, uncomment the volumes entry so Docker uses your config file:

```yaml
volumes:
  - ./config/config.yaml:/app/config.yaml:ro
```

### Start the Host

```bash
docker compose up -d

> ```

Reviewer: It'd be great to show an example output from this command. Something like:

````suggestion
```shell
docker compose up -d
```

```output
Whatever the above command outputs. Obviously just run that command and copy & paste the output into here.
```
````

### Confirm Containers Are Healthy

```bash
docker ps
```

> Both `shinzo-host` and `shinzo-host-client-nginx-1` should show status `Up` and `(healthy)`.

Reviewer: Again, it'd be handy to show the output of this command so that readers know what they should be looking at.

## Verifying Data Ingestion

### Health

```bash
curl http://localhost:8080/health
```

Expected response:

```json
{ "status": "healthy", "defradb_connected": true }

> ```

Reviewer: Wrap the expected output in an `output` codeblock:

````suggestion
```shell
curl http://localhost:8080/health
```

```output
{ "status": "healthy", "defradb_connected": true }
```
````

### Processing metrics

```bash
curl -s http://localhost:8080/metrics | jq
```

Key fields:

| Field | Meaning |
|---|---|
| `blocks_processed` | Blocks scanned so far |
| `logs_processed` | Events captured matching your filter |
| `attestations_created` | Data integrity records written |

> If `logs_processed` stays at 0 but `blocks_processed` is climbing, either no matching events have occurred in the blocks being indexed, or the connected indexer is not providing full transaction data (only block headers). If `transactions_processed` is also 0, contact the Shinzo team for access to a full-data indexer.

Reviewer: Let's link to Discord:

```suggestion
If `logs_processed` stays at 0 but `blocks_processed` is climbing, either no matching events have occurred in the blocks being indexed, or the connected indexer is not providing full transaction data (only block headers). If `transactions_processed` is also 0, contact the [Shinzo team](https://discord.shinzo.network/) for access to a full-data indexer.
```

### Query stored logs

```bash
curl -s -X POST http://localhost:9181/api/v0/graphql \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"query": "{ Ethereum__Mainnet__Log(limit: 10) { _docID address topics blockNumber } }"}' \
  | jq
```

To filter down to a specific contract:

```bash
curl -s -X POST http://localhost:9181/api/v0/graphql \
  -H "Content-Type: application/json" \
  -d '{"query": "{ Ethereum__Mainnet__Log(filter: {address: {_eq: \"0xdAC17F958D2ee523a2206206994597C13D831ec7\"}}, limit: 10) { _docID address topics blockNumber data } }"}' \
  | jq
```

The `topics` array maps directly to `topic0`–`topic3`. For a Transfer event: `topics[0]` is the event signature, `topics[1]` is the sender, `topics[2]` is the receiver. The transfer amount is ABI-encoded in the `data` field and must be decoded in your application.

## Troubleshooting

**Container restarts immediately**

> Run `docker logs shinzo-host | tail -50`. A YAML parse error (indentation, missing quotes) or unset `keyring_secret` are the most common causes. Validate your config at https://www.yamllint.com/.

Reviewer: Don't use raw links. It looks sloppy.

```suggestion
Run `docker logs shinzo-host | tail -50`. A YAML parse error (indentation, missing quotes) or unset `keyring_secret` are the most common causes. Use a [YAML validator](https://www.yamllint.com/) to make sure your config is correct.
```

**Cannot connect to health endpoint**

> * Verify the container is running with `docker ps`. If the container is healthy but the endpoint is still unreachable, check whether another application is already using port 8080.

Reviewer: Do we need this to be a bullet-point?

```suggestion
Verify the container is running with `docker ps`. If the container is healthy but the endpoint is still unreachable, check whether another application is already using port 8080.
```

---
title: Configuring Event Filters on a Shinzo Host
sidebar_label: Configuring Event Filters on a Shinzo Host
sidebar_position: 1
description: Configuring Event Filters on a Shinzo Host
---

## Overview

A Shinzo Host subscribes to a stream of blockchain data and writes it to a local DefraDB instance. By default it stores everything. This guide configures it to store only specific contract events using USDT ERC-20 transfers as the example and prune old data automatically.

## Prerequisites

- Docker Desktop installed and running
- Git
- Basic familiarity with YAML

## Clone the repository

```bash
git clone https://github.com/shinzonetwork/shinzo-host-client.git
cd shinzo-host-client
```

## Configure the host

Open `config/config.yaml`. The sections below are the ones you need to understand.

### Securing Your Local Database

```yaml
defradb:
  keyring_secret: "your-secret-here"
```

This key encrypts the local DefraDB instance. Use a strong secret value before running a host in production.

### Connecting to the Shinzo Network

```yaml
shinzo:
  hub_base_url: rpc.develop.devnet.shinzo.network:26657

>   start_height: 0

Reviewer 2: Not needed

Author: thanks @dvncan, updated!
